## CS499 ePortfolio

By: Bao Doan

### Authentication System Code Review Video

{% include videoPlayer.html id=page.youtubeId %}

### Artifact Enhancement 1

The artifact I have here is an Authentication System that I have created as a final project for my IT-145 Foundation in Application Development course.  An overview of Authentication System project is to take in user’s username and password input.  Then compare those credentials with existing credentials under MD5 hash on a text file.  If the credentials match, the system will display appropriate content from other text files that match with user job roles.  There are total of three different job roles: zookeeper, admin, and veterinarian.  This project was originally developed to take input and display output via IDE’s console.  For the first enhancement, I have decided to implement the project with Java graphical user interface, where the project will display java panels and allow users to interact on panels with feature such as buttons, labels, windows, and different text sizes/fonts.  With this project, I will be able to display my skills in: implementation of Java SWING library, displaying Java language knowledge, implementation of MD5 hash string, usage of pseudocode to segment functionality of software, solve logic problems and implement them in software, applying coding best practices, employ iterative algorithm, implement classes in a way that could apply to future changes to classes and objects, find potential security vulnerabilities or bugs from project, fix potential security vulnerabilities and bugs, create industry-standard software design.

Also to enhance my capability in software design and engineering, algorithms and data structure, and databases management. 
This enhancement was done through NetBeans IDE and the utilization of Java swing GUI libraries.  I have implemented flowchart approach when working on this enhancement.  Where I drew out a pictorial representation of my Authentication System algorithm and work from node to node to build the project. Since this is my first time interacting with Java Swing, I have learned new techniques in developing graphical user interface.  I found that NetBeans IDE is very convenient with resizing and generating buttons.  Instead of typing in boundary values, mouse drag and drop movement could be used to resize the button to the appropriate size via NetBeans design function.  The struggling part with this enhancement is implementing MD5 hash with JLabel input.  An issue came up when I was trying to convert hashed MD5 value into string.  After couple of searches on the internet, the solution I came up with is to store byte value into BigInteger datatype and use “toString()” function to convert it to string value.  From there hashed value can be read and compared to values on credential text file.  

[Link to Artifact Enhancement 1](https://github.com/bdoan95gl/bdoan95gl.github.io/tree/Artifact-1)


### Artifact Enhancement 2

For this second enhancement, I have implemented SHA-256 hashing to my program instead of MD5 hashing as well as adding “Create Account” function for my program.  Both MD5 and SHA-256 are hashing algorithm that take in input values and return a fixed-length value that have no discernable pattern.  MD5 produce 128-bit hash value while SHA-256 produce 256-bit hash value.  Current researched indicate that SHA-256 hash algorithm is considerably more secure than MD5 hash algorithm.  For my program, switching from MD5 to SHA-256 was a smooth process since Java security message digest library contains both algorithms.  I only had to replace “getInstance” value from MD5 to SHA-256.  

The second portion of this enhancement is adding “Create Account” function.  This function will take in three fields of input: username, password, and re-enter password.  Once all three fields are filled out and password and re-enter password field matched, password string will be hashed with SHA-256 algorithm.  The function contains a loop condition that only allow account creation when password and re-enter password field match.  It will then store all three fields into a credentials text file using Print Writer method provided by Java.  This function included quit button and designed in graphical user interface layout.  It was created as a separate class file and can be called by “Create Account” button click from main GUI.  I also added a new job role for this function which is new user job role.  Instead of zookeeper, admin, and veterinarian, newly account will be defaulted with new user job role and will output appropriate job description when credentials matched at main GUI.  Both main authentication GUI and create account class will share access to credential text file.  

The reason I chose this second enhancement project because it satisfies algorithm and data structure aspect of computer science requirement.  SHA-256 hashing will touch base with algorithm side and creating account class will touch base with data structure side.  Also this second enhancement allow myself to display skills such as: articulate approach to solving complex logic, employing various data structures when constructing program, design simple object-oriented with data abstraction and information hiding, implementation of hashing algorithm, usage of software libraries, compilers, editors, and debuggers to produce effective software, and display understanding of essential semantic structures of programming language such as values, types, storage, control flow, and etc.

[Link to Artifact Enhancement 2](https://github.com/bdoan95gl/bdoan95gl.github.io/tree/Artifact-2)

### Artifact Enhancement 3

For this third enhancement, I have implemented database storage instead of text file storage from the previous enhancements.  The functionality of the authentication program remains the same.  It still able to perform login, create account, SHA-256 string hash, failed login attempts, and display GUI.  But instead of storing and comparing values from a text file, the program will now connect to a database for storage and comparing value.  Mysql-connector-java-8.0.13.jar file and phpMyAdmin were utilized to establish database connection and database management.   Mysql connector jar file enables the building of database, database connection, and perform java query command toward database.  phpMyAdmin program allow me to the view content of the database and make sure my third enhancement can manipulate data on the database.  The default database information for this third enhancement includes “authdb” for database name, database server will be on local host, root access privilege with “bao123” for password.  I’m using MySQL as relational database management system for this third enhancement.  Beside database conversion, I also added a feature on my program to check for existing username within database.  When user trying to create an account with existing username, the program will display appropriate matched credentials message and decline account creation.

The reason I chose this third enhancement is to display my ability in implement approach to ensure data are explicitly validated, implementation of database, display mySQL techniques CRUDs and query concepts, implementation of java to database cross platform, arrays and control structures with database, and implementation of external database software such Xampp and PHP.

[Link to Artifact Enhancement 3](https://github.com/bdoan95gl/bdoan95gl.github.io/tree/Artifact-3)
